Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
B.J.
Bill Kling started Kling Engineering in 1975, but by then his own surveying skills had been tapped in most every arena you can imagine, including in World War II as an infantry soldier with the 102nd.
His unit sailed overseas late in the European campaign in 1944, but in time for the Battle of the Bulge and in time to witness the surrender of thousands of German troops, many soldiers who were interrogated by Bill Kling.
After the war, Bill Kling entered Texas A&M as a 30-year-old freshman.
After the war, he met Floris, and they've been married 57 years now.
B.J.
Bill Kling is our guest today on Veterans of the Valley.
It's a pleasure to have you, Bill, on Veterans of the Valley.
I'm going to let you sort of take me from 1941 up to 1944 when you first went overseas from New York straight over to France and sort of how you got into the service.
The draft came up and your number came up in 1941.
Is that how it worked?
That's right.
It was...
October of 41, my draft number came up and I had an opportunity to be deferred because I was doing some work for Matagorda County, living in Bay City.
I chose to go ahead and enter the service and serve my year's time and come back and get about my
my life, but Pearl Harbor came along about that time in December of that same year, so it was almost five years later before I got to take up my civilian life again.
Yeah, a lot of young men and women who had planned on just serving a year, Pearl Harbor came, and that changed things for a lot of people, didn't it?
That's right.
We were in for duration then.
Indeed.
I went from Bay City to San Antonio, Fort Sam Houston.
Yes, sir.
Stayed there and was processed into the military and given uniforms and filled out the necessary papers.
This was October in Texas.
What kind of uniform did they give you?
Oh, whoa.
It seemed like it was thick as a blanket and the temperature was in the high 90s or
Low hundreds, I thought.
The Army thought it was October, so it must be cold everywhere.
That's right.
So they sent me to, assigned me to the field artillery, and I was assigned to an instrument and survey school in Fort Sill, Oklahoma.
Went to Fort Sill, completed that training.
My mother and dad came up that Christmas.
They had to borrow gasoline ration stamps to have enough gasoline to drive from Bay City up to Lawton, Oklahoma, and Fort Sill.
But anyway, we had a visit.
After I completed my training in the instrument and survey school there, I was assigned to the 45th Division, which had just been activated at Fort Sill.
We were issued equipment there.
Some of it was condemned tents, worn out.
You'd go to sleep at night and look up through the holes in the tents and see the stars and hope it didn't rain, which it did sometime.
After a few weeks there, we were assigned to Camp Barkley out close to Abilene.
Went out to Camp Barkley, moved into a cotton patch in which the cotton had been gathered, but the stalks were still standing up two, three feet high.
And you were in eight-man tents, right?
In eight-man tents with wood-burning stove in there to keep you warm.
We built wooden walkways to stay out of the mud.
During this time, the barracks were being constructed on base there, and we later moved into the barracks.
Stayed there for a few months, and then was assigned to Fort Devens, Massachusetts.
Went up on a troop train, took all of our equipment on the train,
After we got up there and got settled in with our equipment, they moved us down to East Falmouth, Massachusetts, which was on Narragansett Bay.
And our mission there and what we did for the next several months was to establish the routine that was used for landing craft throughout the U.S.
Pacific and European theaters.
For the beach landings, like at Normandy or at Iwo Jima.
Basically the way this worked, they were landing, the troops came in on troop ships, offloaded out in the ocean or bay, wherever, offshore, hopefully outside of enemy artillery fire.
loaded on landing craft and they went in what they call waves.
And the first wave had certain personnel that were key in getting the beachhead established.
And when we first started out, well, I had about 60 pounds of equipment and could barely move.
And we got through, I had a,
a compass and a set of field glasses and my personal weapons and that was it.
But anyway, these tactics were used successfully most of the time throughout the rest of the war.
After this, we were moved to Pine Camp, New York, up in the upper state of New York, just across the St.
Lawrence River from Canada.
It was wintertime, and we were maneuvering against the 2nd Army Division.
Snow was about two feet deep, and it was cold.
Being from Texas, I was ready to get out of there, so there was an opportunity to apply for officer's training school.
So I applied for officer's training and was accepted and sent back to Fort Sill for officer's candidate training.
In December of that year, I was...
graduated as a second lieutenant, and then in January, assigned to the 102nd Division, which was being formed at Camp Maxi.
In Paris, Texas.
And I understand there were some young soldiers that came from all parts of the country, New York, Illinois, that just weren't used to that.
Most of them didn't.
Well, they'd spent their life on concrete pavement, and they didn't know about post oak trees and grass burrs.
And we'd go out in the field, and it was a real learning experience for them.
For a lot of people, especially the non-Texans.
One of the things that may be kind of interesting, I was assigned to the 380th Battalion, which was one of the three 105 Houcher battalions.
in the 102nd, and my battalion commander was Colonel Hannigan.
Colonel Hannigan was later picked by Earl Rudder for A&M.
He was then General Hannigan, and he was dean of men here at A&M.
Wow.
And we reacquainted ourselves after he came here, and so that was... That's quite, adds to the...
The premise of it is a small world out there.
That's right.
Eventually, you went to Louisiana on maneuvers, and you told me when we spoke yesterday that you saw or you met General Patton.
Yes.
Talk about that.
Well, Patton was there, and if fighting the war had been as physically trying as maneuvers in Louisiana, I don't know if we'd ever made it or not, but I survived the...
the maneuvers in Louisiana and our unit was then assigned to Camp Swift.
Near Bastrop.
Near Bastrop, between Bastrop and Austin.
We completed or went ahead with our training and basically completed our training there.
While we were stationed at Camp Swift, I was assigned to
or my survey department, at that time I was in Division Artillery headquarters, responsible for the training of all the surveyors in the Division Artillery of our division.
I was assigned to then Camp Polk, not Camp Polk, Camp Hood,
and did the basic surveying for what was then called the AGF test or Army Ground Force test.
All units had to go through certain tests at certain phases of their training to determine whether they were proficient at that level of their training.
And so I put in the basic control, kind of an interesting story there.
We wound up doing the job three times, mainly because of the bad data that was given to us to start from.
We were living in tents out in the middle of the impact area out there.
Of course, they weren't firing at that time.
It was hot and we were ready to get out of there.
But anyway, that was my first introduction to the area up there around what's now Fort Hood.
Right.
I want to go ahead and get you overseas.
So we'll fast forward.
You went to New Jersey to Fort Dix.
And then in the fall of 44, you sailed across to France.
And I thought this was interesting.
Whereas most veterans earlier in the war, they took the North Atlantic route to England to prepare for their duty in Europe.
But you were one of the first units to sail directly from New York straight to France.
I believe that's correct.
I think we were the first division to sail directly from the States to the continent of Europe.
So we landed at the port of Cherbourg in France and moved from there where we're living out in the field.
My next task was with
with our executive officer, Colonel Watkins, to run the Red Ball Express.
Right.
Now, talk about this, because this was a truck convoy.
Yeah, the Red Ball Express had 500 two-and-a-half-ton trucks and one-ton trailers.
Yes, sir.
Their mission was to move all the supplies from the beachhead up into the combat area where soldiers needed.
And this was everything from food to ammunition to...
Beds, shoes, all supplies were moved on Red Ball Express.
I think a lot of people would be surprised to understand that Normandy Beach, while it's most famous for D-Day and the D-Day landing and what happened there,
that after that, long after that, it was actually used as a place to deposit these supplies, new supplies, and that's where you would go.
Normally, one place you would go with the Red Ball Express to pick up these supplies.
And when we talk supplies, we're talking, I guess, weapons, Jeeps, big supplies, little supplies, all kind of supplies to fight the war.
That's right.
Now, of course, what the Red Ball Express moved was the supplies, the trucks you'd drive.
But supplies that you could load on a truck, move by truck.
And we used two one-way roads through France, one going from the beachhead up to the combat area and one returning.
There was no civilian traffic or anything else allowed.
Nothing but military and Red Ball Express trucks.
So you felt pretty secure as far as the road.
We did, but we still, we patrolled it all the time with mainly MPs that controlled it, patrolled the area.
There was some looting that went on, and we never stopped a truck.
If it stopped, it stopped because it was broken down, and we had wreckers and service vehicles that would hook onto it, bring it to the shop, and it was repaired and put back in service.
Right, right.
I want to get to this point now because I certainly don't want to miss it.
You were a surveyor.
That's right.
And when people go around town and they see survey crews out surveying whether it's a piece of property here in Bryan College Station, they think of surveyors as people that are establishing property lines and such.
But a surveyor also used those skills to actually fight the war, to shoot the guns, to shoot them accurately, to be efficient with our weaponry.
Talk about that whole aspect of being a surveyor and how it served us in the war.
As far as I can determine from what my experience overseas and what I have read since, the United States field artillery, Army field artillery, was the most efficient of any unit compared to the British, the French, and the Russians, and the Germans.
We were able to take
artillery pieces and fire more guns on the same target accurately than anyone else.
And this was because the first thing that we did when the artillery battery and battalion went into position was to tie the four guns and a battery together.
The next mission was to tie the three batteries
of the battalion together, then the next mission was to tie the battalions all together and tie them into the, and when I say tie in, it's determined the location of each gun with reference to every other gun.
Right.
So that when you fired one gun on a target, you could, with very little
mathematics or effort, you could fire all of them on them.
And this is what allowed us to mass artillery fire.
There was another little thing, I don't know, I wouldn't call it a trick particularly, but it was something that I realized early on that proved to be very effective
The first few rounds of artillery are always, if they're on target, they're the ones that do the most damage.
After two or three rounds have hit, then the enemy that you're firing on has found him a hole if there's one there or moved or something.
So our effort was always to be most effective on that first round.
A 105 howitzer or any howitzer that is able to be the gun barrel, which is able to be raised above 45 degrees, you can fire two rounds out of the same gun and have them hit the target at the same time.
One of them is high angle fire, which as you elevate an artillery piece above 45 degrees, then the shell begins to come back toward you.
So you determine, you shoot the first shell high angle, and the second one low angle fire, below 45 degrees, and with the firing tables and the information that's available, you can figure out the exact time where two shells from the same gun hit the target at the same time, and that's pretty... It was a technology and an intelligence that you learned well before the war that served Americans in the war, you along with the other surveyors.
I want to move on in your relationship with the German enemy.
You were saying that a little bit later on the Germans had been backed up to the Siegfried Line, but it was at that point when going through Holland that you actually encountered some resistance.
And in the form of pillboxes that weren't your normal
pillbox uh encampments not like you would see at normandy or something like that but were camouflaged more as houses talk about about that well i i believe i'm correct when i say the siegfried line was built shorter as a as a counter to the marginal line in france of course now we're we're in holland here uh our unit was at this time was stationed in
which was a border crossing between Germany and Holland and living in Dutch Holland barracks there.
I lost my train of thought.
What was I talking about?
We were talking about the pillboxes.
Oh, yeah.
Now, the first line of defense was all camouflaged in pillboxes, many of them.
as houses or buildings of some sort, the walls of which were able to be folded down and the guns already in place.
Now, the Siegfried Line was probably, would average 15, 20 miles deep.
And the back, the most eastern part of the
of the line was a series of bunkers where they had supplies and communications already in place and it was just a matter of moving in a group of troops and keeping them in reserve in these bunkers until they were needed for a counterattack.
The basic tactics of
of combat is that once you are attacked and the enemy breaks through, if you're gonna survive, you better counterattack somewhere and reestablish control
of an area in which you can work from.
Right.
I want to stop for a second because I want to show a couple of pictures that you supplied to us.
And the first one, I think, is going to take us all the way back to your hometown of Kasi that I chose.
This is a football team, I believe, if I've got the right order yet, that we're going to put on the screen.
There you are.
This is where you grew up in Cossie, just down the road from Bryan College Station.
And this was the 1935 football team.
And I believe you said that you were in the back row standing next to the coach.
That's right.
Who was in the suit.
You're to the left of the coach.
I'm one, two, three.
Four from the left.
Fourth from the left.
Right.
How'd that team do that year?
I don't remember.
Probably not very well.
Probably didn't win a championship or you wouldn't have remembered.
No, no.
We've got another photograph of a young soldier, Bill Kling, and there you are.
Quite a good-looking soldier.
And you were a second lieutenant in that picture, right?
That's shortly after I was commissioned.
Right, after you were commissioned.
See the bar on your shoulder?
Yeah.
There you go.
That's great.
You told us right before we went on the air here, you talked about some instances that you flew during the war, and it had to do with sort of a reconnaissance type of thing.
Talk a little bit about what that was about.
The way the equipment was set up at that time, Division Artillery Headquarters, of course, controlled.
We used light aircraft, Piper Cub-type aircraft, two-seated aircraft for artillery observation to adjust artillery fire.
Basically, this was done by
by firing around as close to the target as you could and then the observer would tell fire direction control how much left or right to move the next round and whether to move it up or down.
I did some of this mainly as a fired core counter-battery, which was using core artillery, and sometimes we had as many as 25 battalions of artillery available to fire.
That's a lot of firepower.
And any time we observed the German artillery,
flying or firing or we got a report from another observer somewhere, then we tried to neutralize that and most of the time we were pretty effective at it.
We've got about four minutes left.
I want you to talk about the interrogation of the Germans who surrendered.
I thought that that was interesting.
You told me about some of the questions that you would ask to sort of discover what their habits were, to sort of discover how to best fight them.
Talk about some of the questions that you ask in the interrogation.
Well, one of the common things that we tried to interrupt was the hot meal that a soldier got in the wintertime in cold weather is a real morale booster.
If he's eating cold meals in a foxhole all the time, it gets pretty dreary.
So if he can meet even in small groups with some of his compadres and have a hot meal, even if it's nothing but a hot cup of coffee, it's a tremendous morale booster.
We realized that early on and made an effort to interrupt this.
So one of the questions that we would typically ask was, do you have
have a hot meal every day and what time is it?
And we wouldn't try to ask them the military capabilities of their unit because they were well versed in the Geneva Convention.
But you would ask what most people would consider irrelevant questions which once you fit them together form a pattern
And I think we were effective in doing this.
The 102nd had an interesting patch that you supplied to us today.
I'm holding it here.
I think we can get a shot of it.
You called it.
It was the Ozark Division.
Is that right?
That's right.
The outer yellow ring there is the O, the Z in the middle with the arc underneath.
It was a unit that was formed in World War I, put in reserve or disbanded between World War I and reactivated World War II.
And this is a unit that I went overseas with.
Right.
We just have a few minutes left, so we have to fast forward.
You did not have quite enough points to come home as early as some, and you stayed until December of 1945.
It was quite a trip.
coming home in the ocean.
You thought maybe things were going to end on your trip home because of a storm that you came through, right?
Yes, we left out of Marseille, France, sailed through the Straits of Gibraltar and headed for the Virginia coast.
Not too far out, we ran into a storm.
This is in January.
December and January of 45, 46.
The weather got so bad that sailors were not allowed, or none of us were allowed out on deck except in an emergency situation, and then that was with safety harness on.
The lines that you could see outside the ship, the seawater would freeze to where they were four to six inches in diameter.
the waves were 50, 60 feet high.
You'd look out the porthole and you looked up to see the crest of the wave when the ship was down in the trough of the wave.
So they, which I think wisely, turned south and added about a week to our
time coming back.
There were four of us that played bridge all the time on there and for a long time and maybe somewhere around the house I've still got the score pad.
We were up to almost 40,000 points.
38,000 some odd points.
We kept running total.
Bill claimed the time just goes too fast.
You came home, you started cleaning engineering in 1975 and you and Floris were married 57 years ago and
Graduated from A&M in 1953 as a 34-year-old senior.
That's correct.
And thank you very much for your service, and we appreciate you being a guest on Veterans of the Valley.
It's been an honor to visit with you.
I appreciate it, Tom.
Thank you, Bill.
I learn new things with every veteran that I visit on Veterans of the Valley, and it's amazing to learn how the familiar work of today's surveyor helped us win the tactics battle in the European campaign, thanks to B.J.
Bill Kling of College Station for his service in the war and his continued contributions as a valued citizen.
Thanks to all veterans for their service.
And thank you to our underwriter, First National Bank.
And be sure to read about other stories of veterans in Brazos Valley Heroes each Sunday in the Eagle.
For Bill Kling, I'm Tom Turbeville.
We'll see you next time on Veterans of the Valley.
you